KEP-4020: Unknown Version Interoperability Proxy (#4015)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-api-machinery/4020-unknown-version-interoperability-proxy/README.md

  make progress and is stuck for the duration of the upgrade.
* Likewise proxying but not merging the discovery document, or merging the
  discovery document but serving 503s instead of proxying, doesn't fix the
  problem completely. We need both safety against destructive actions and the
  ability for controllers to proceed and not block.

### User Stories (Optional)

#### Garbage Collector

The garbage collector makes decisions about deleting objects when all
referencing objects are deleted. A discovery gap / apiserver mismatch, as
described above, could result in GC seeing a 404 and assuming an object has been
deleted; this could result in it deleting a subsequent object that it should
not.

This proposal will cause the GC to see the complete list of resources in
discovery, and when it requests specific objects, see either the correct object
or get a 503 (which it handles safely).

#### Namespace Lifecycle Controller

This controller seeks to empty all objects from a namespace when it is deleted.
Discovery failures cause NLC to be unable to tell if objects of a given resource
are present in a namespace. It fails safe, meaning it refuses to delete the

> namespace until it can verify it is empty: this causes slowness deleteing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
namespace until it can verify it is empty: this causes slowness deleting
```

This proposal addresses both problems.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

Cluster admins might not read the release notes and realize they should enable
network/firewall connectivity between apiservers. In this case clients will
receive 503s instead of transparently being proxied. 503 is still safer than
today's behavior.

Requests will consume egress bandwidth for 2 apiservers when proxied. We can cap
the number if needed, but upgrades aren't that frequent and few resources are
changed on releases, so these requests should not be common. We will count them
with a metric.

There could be a large volume of requests for a specific resource which might result in the identified apiserver being unable to serve the proxied requests. This scenario should not occur too frequently, since resource types which have large request volume should not be added or removed during an upgrade -- that would cause other problems, too.

> We should ensure at most one proxy, rather than proxying the request over and over again (if the source apiserver has an incorrect understanding of what the destination apiserver can serve).

Reviewer: I don't think this is consistent with the statement on (what is currently) line 303 which says:

> If the local apiserver ID is not found in the list of serviceable-by server IDs, a random apiserver ID will be selected from the retrieved list and the request will be proxied to this apiserver

In this particular edge case, we can have two hops.

Reviewer 2: But the number of uvip-proxied request is still 1? The first apiserver receives the request, and then when it determines it can't serve the request, it proxies the request to the remote apiserver- which will serve it, no matter if its capable of doing so or not.

Reviewer 3: Can we fine tune this section a bit? When reading the KEP top-to-bottom, it states a fairly major potential problem. It would be really nice for the planned mitigation to the problem to be described here in a bit more detail.

Reviewer 4: we should not have a kind of "split horizon" problem, maybe we can identify the request so it can only be proxied once?

Reviewer 4: oh, is already there https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4015/files#r1218365537, my bad

Reviewer 2: Added more details, check again please?

#### Identifying destination apiserver's network location

We will use the already existing [masterlease reconciler](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/controlplane/reconcilers/lease.go) to store/retrieve the IPs and ports for kube-apiservers. Major reasons to use this are

1. masterlease reconciler already stores kube-apiserver IPs currently
2. this information is not exposed to users in an API that can be used maliciously
3. existing code to handle lifecycle of the masterleases is convenient

How the masterlease reconciler will be used is as follows:

1. We will use the already existing IP in Endpoints.Subsets.Addresses of the masterlease by default

2. For users with network configurations that would not allow Endpoints.Subsets.Addresses to be reachable from a kube-apiserver, we will introduce a new --advertise-peer-ip flag to kube-apiserver. We will store its value as an annotation on the masterlease and use this to route the request to the right destination server

3. We will also expose the IP and port information of the kube-apiservers as annotations in APIserver identity lease object for visibility/debugging purposes

> 4. We will also use an egress dialer for network connections made to peer kube-apiservers. For this, will create a new type for the network context to be used for peer kube-apiserver connections ([xref](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/staging/src/k8s.io/apiserver/pkg/apis/apiserver/types.go#L55-L71))

Reviewer: I prefer to use git tags for references since master is floating and can mess with the line numbers. 

```suggestion
4. We will also use an egress dialer for network connections made to peer kube-apiservers. For this, will create a new type for the network context to be used for peer kube-apiserver connections ([xref](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/release-1.27/staging/src/k8s.io/apiserver/pkg/apis/apiserver/types.go#L56-L71))
```

  - Event Reason: 
- [ ] API .status
  - Condition name: 
  - Other field: 
- [ ] Other (treat as last resort)
  - Details:

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

<!--
This is your opportunity to define what "normal" quality of service looks like
for a feature.

It's impossible to provide comprehensive guidance, but at the very
high level (needs more precise definitions) those may be things like:
  - per-day percentage of API calls finishing with 5XX errors <= 1%
  - 99% percentile over day of absolute value from (job creation time minus expected
    job creation time) for cron job <= 10%
  - 99.9% of /health requests per day finish with 200 code

These goals will help you determine what you need to measure (SLIs) in the next
question.
-->

This feature depends on the `StorageVersion` feature, that generates objects with a `storageVersion.status.serverStorageVersions[*].apiServerID` field which is used to find the destination apiserver's network location.

###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

<!--
Pick one more of these and delete the rest.
-->

- [X] Metrics

>   - Metric name: `kubernetes_uvip_count`

Reviewer: counters are conventionally suffixed with `_total` not `_count`.

Reviewer 2: Updated to `_total`

Additionally, if the NLC knows about a resource that the apiserver it is talking
to does not, it may incorrectly get a 404, assume a collection is empty, and
delete the namespace too early, leaving garbage behind in etcd. This is a
correctness problem, the garbage will reappear if a namespace of the same name
is recreated.

This proposal addresses both problems.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

1. **Network connectivity isues between apiservers**
    
    Cluster admins might not read the release notes and realize they should enable network/firewall connectivity between apiservers. In this case clients will receive 503s instead of transparently being proxied. 503 is still safer than today's behavior. We will clearly document the steps needed to enable the feature and also include steps to verify that the feature is working as intended. Looking at the following exposed metrics can help wth that 

>     1. `kubernetes_uvip_proxied_request_total` to monitor the number of UVIP-proxies requests. This metric can tell us the number of requests that were successfully proxied and the ones that failed

Reviewer 3: nit: avoid UVIP in user facing stuff? Maybe `kubernetes_apiserver_rerouted_request_total`

Reviewer 2: Addressed in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4074

    2. `apiserver_request_total` to check the success/error status of the requests

2. **Increase in egress bandwidth**
    
    Requests will consume egress bandwidth for 2 apiservers when proxied. We can cap the number if needed, but upgrades aren't that frequent and few resources are changed on releases, so these requests should not be common. We will count them with a metric.

3. **Increase in request traffic directed at destination kube-apiserver**

    There could be a large volume of requests for a specific resource which might result in the identified apiserver being unable to serve the proxied requests. This scenario should not occur too frequently, since resource types which have large request volume should not be added or removed during an upgrade - that would cause other problems, too.

4. **Indefinite rerouting of the request**
    

>     We should ensure at most one proxy, rather than proxying the request over and over again (if the source apiserver has an incorrect understanding of what the destination apiserver can serve). To do this, we will add a new header such as `X-Kubernetes-UVIP-Rerouted:true` to the  request once it is determined that the request cannot be served by the local apiserver and should therefore be proxied.  

Reviewer 3: nit: avoid UVIP in user facing stuff? Maybe `X-Kubernetes-APIServer-Rerouted`

Reviewer 2: Addressed in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4074

1. A new filter will be added to the [handler chain] of the aggregation layer. This filter will maintain an internal map with the key being the group-version-resource and the value being a list of server IDs of apiservers that are capable of serving that group-version-resource
   1. This internal map is populated using an informer for StorageVersion objects. An event handler will be added for this informer that will get the apiserver ID of the requested group-version-resource and update the internal map accordingly

2. This filter will pass on the request to the next handler in the local aggregator chain, if:
   1. It is a non resource request
   2. The StorageVersion informer cache hasn't synced yet or if `StorageVersionManager.Completed()` has returned false. We will serve error 503 in this case
   3. The request has a header `X-Kubernetes-UVIP-Rerouted:true` that indicates that this request has been proxied once already. If for some reason the resource is not found locally, we will serve error 503
   4. No StorageVersion was retrieved for it, meaning the request is for an aggregated API or for a custom resource

>    5. If the local apiserver ID is found in the list of serviceable-by server IDs from the internal map

Reviewer 3: This is an implementation detail, but I'll mention it here so I don't forget-- To determine if the local apiserver can handle a GVK, I'd prefer check the apiserver's already available in-memory registry of available GVKs directly than to check the data loaded in from StorageVersion API. This will be fast and low risk.

2. [APIServerIdentity Lease object](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/release-1.27/pkg/controlplane/instance.go#L559-L577) for users to view this information for debugging

3. We will use an egress dialer for network connections made to peer kube-apiservers. For this, will create a new type for the network context to be used for peer kube-apiserver connections ([xref](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/release-1.27/staging/src/k8s.io/apiserver/pkg/apis/apiserver/types.go#L56-L71))

#### Proxy transport between apiservers and authn

For the mTLS between source and destination apiservers, we will do the following

1. For server authentication by the client (source apiserver) : the client needs to validate the [server certs](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/release-1.27/staging/src/k8s.io/apiserver/pkg/server/options/serving.go#L59) (presented by the destination apiserver), for which it will 

>    1. look at the CA bundle of the authority that signed those certs. We will introduce a new flag --peer-ca-file that **is required be passed (for this feature)** to the kube-apiserver that will be used to verify the presented server certs

Reviewer 3: Re `--peer-ca-file that **is required be passed (for this feature)**`.  I think we should allow the feature to be enabled even if there is no networking enabled between apiservers to satisfy https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4015#issuecomment-1583094402.  In such a configuration the difference between having the feature on and off is that when it is on 503s instead of 404s.

Reviewer 2: Addresses in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4074

###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?

<!--
Describe manual testing that was done and the outcomes.
Longer term, we may want to require automated upgrade/rollback tests, but we
are missing a bunch of machinery and tooling and can't do that now.
-->

Upgrade and rollback will be tested before the feature goes to Beta.

###### Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features, APIs, fields of API types, flags, etc.?

<!--
Even if applying deprecation policies, they may still surprise some users.
-->

No.

### Monitoring Requirements

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.

For GA, this section is required: approvers should be able to confirm the
previous answers based on experience in the field.
-->

###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

<!--
Ideally, this should be a metric. Operations against the Kubernetes API (e.g.,
checking if there are objects with field X set) may be a last resort. Avoid
logs or events for this purpose.
-->

The following metrics could be used to see if the feature is in use:

> - kubernetes_uvip_proxied_request_total

Reviewer 3: nit: avoid "UVIP" acronym

Reviewer 2: Addresses in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4074

-->

## Alternatives

### Network location of apiservers

1. Use [endpoint reconciler's masterlease](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/release-1.27/pkg/controlplane/reconcilers/lease.go) 
    1. We will use the already existing IP in Endpoints.Subsets.Addresses of the masterlease by default
    2. For users with network configurations that would not allow Endpoints.Subsets.Addresses to be reachable from a kube-apiserver, we will introduce a new optional --bind-peer-ip flag to kube-apiserver. We will store its value as an annotation on the masterlease and use this to route the request to the right destination server
    3. We will also need to store the apiserver identity as an annotation in the masterlease so that we can map the identity of the apiserver to its IP
    4. We will also expose the IP and port information of the kube-apiservers as annotations in APIserver identity lease object for visibility/debugging purposes

* Pros
  1. Masterlease reconciler already stores kube-apiserver IPs currently
  2. This information is not exposed to users in an API that can be used maliciously
  3. Existing code to handle lifecycle of the masterleases is convenient

* Cons

>   1. using masterlease will include making some changes to the legacy code that does the endpoint reconciliation which is known to be brittle

Reviewer 3: Could we use a separate reconciliation loop that is only enabled when our alpha feature gate is turned on?

Reviewer 2: Updated the decision under [Identifying destination apiserver's network location](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/01637e17da9a0d1359a9304ad005c88234cd61ca/keps/sig-api-machinery/4020-unknown-version-interoperability-proxy/README.md#identifying-destination-apiservers-network-location) section.

which apiserver they happened to connect to. Currently this is not the case.

Today, these things potentially differ:
* Resources available somewhere in the cluster
* Resources known by a client (i.e. read from discovery from some apiserver)
* Resources that can be actuated by a client

This can have serious consequences, such as namespace deletion being blocked
incorrectly or objects being garbage collected mistakenly.

### Goals

* Ensure discovery reports the same set of resources everywhere (not just group
  versions, as it does today)
* Ensure that every resource in discovery can be accessed successfully
* In the failure case (e.g. network not routable between apiservers), ensure
  that unreachable resources are served 503 and not 404.

### Non-Goals

* Lock particular clients to particular versions

## Proposal

We will use the existing `StorageVersion` API to figure out which group, versions,
and resources an apiserver can serve.

API server change:
* A new handler is added to the stack:

  - If the request is for a group/version/resource the apiserver doesn't have
    locally (we can use the StorageVersion API), it will proxy the request to

>     one of the apiservers that is listed in the object. If an apiserver fails

Reviewer 4: which object is this referring to?

Reviewer 2: This object https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/release-1.27/pkg/apis/apiserverinternal/types.go#L64
Added the link for ref in the KEP too

Discovery failures cause NLC to be unable to tell if objects of a given resource
are present in a namespace. It fails safe, meaning it refuses to delete the
namespace until it can verify it is empty: this causes slowness deleting
namespaces that is a common source of complaint.

Additionally, if the NLC knows about a resource that the apiserver it is talking
to does not, it may incorrectly get a 404, assume a collection is empty, and
delete the namespace too early, leaving garbage behind in etcd. This is a
correctness problem, the garbage will reappear if a namespace of the same name
is recreated.

This proposal addresses both problems.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

Cluster admins might not read the release notes and realize they should enable
network/firewall connectivity between apiservers. In this case clients will
receive 503s instead of transparently being proxied. 503 is still safer than

> today's behavior.

Reviewer 3: This can be further mitigated by documenting how to enable the feature to include a step for how to safely verify that the connectivity between apiservers is working as intended.

Reviewer 4: we can also add a metric here to know of number of proxied connections succeed vs failed

Reviewer 2: Added both suggested points.

Requests will consume egress bandwidth for 2 apiservers when proxied. We can cap
the number if needed, but upgrades aren't that frequent and few resources are
changed on releases, so these requests should not be common. We will count them
with a metric.

> There could be a large volume of requests for a specific resource which might result in the identified apiserver being unable to serve the proxied requests. This scenario should not occur too frequently, since resource types which have large request volume should not be added or removed during an upgrade -- that would cause other problems, too.

Reviewer 4: Does APF applies here? it applies once or twice?

Reviewer 2: UVIP filter comes after the APF filter. So yes it will be applied (once if the request is served by local apiserver, twice if the request is proxied to remote apiserver)

We should ensure at most one proxy, rather than proxying the request over and over again (if the source apiserver has an incorrect understanding of what the destination apiserver can serve).

To prevent server-side request forgeries we will not give control over information about apiserver IP/endpoint and the trust bundle (used to authenticate server while proxying) to users via REST APIs.

## Design Details

> ### Aggregation Layer

Reviewer 3: For posterity, can we include an image of the amazing diagram that was presented to the SIG in the slide deck?

Reviewer 2: Added

Reviewer 2: The image currently contains text that suggests "apiserver's host:port is obtained from APIServerIdentity lease". This is still subject to discussion, since we have identified concerns around using the masterlease endpoint reconciler for this purpose (which includes making some changes like storing the ports, APIServerId to these objects- that could result in breaking changes to this legacy code)

1. A new filter will be added to the [handler chain] of the aggregation layer. This filter will maintain an internal map with the key being the group-version-resource and the value being a list of server IDs of apiservers that are capable of serving that group-version-resource
   1. This internal map is populated using an informer for StorageVersion objects. An event handler will be added for this informer that will get the apiserver ID of the requested group-version-resource and update the internal map accordingly

2. This filter will pass on the request to the next handler in the local aggregator chain, if:
   1. It is a non resource request
   2. The StorageVersion informer cache hasn't synced yet or if `StorageVersionManager.Completed()` has returned false. We will serve error 503 in this case

>    3. The request has a header that indicates that this request has been proxied once already. If for some reason the resource is not found locally, we will serve error 503

Reviewer 3: I'm curious what the header will look like. Include a short code snipped of what it will look like here?

Reviewer 2: Added.

   4. No StorageVersion was retrieved for it, meaning the request is for an aggregated API or for a custom resource
   5. If the local apiserver ID is found in the list of serviceable-by server IDs from the internal map

> 3. If the local apiserver ID is not found in the list of serviceable-by server IDs, a random apiserver ID will be selected from the retrieved list and the request will be proxied to this apiserver

Reviewer 4: why do we forward if we don't know? should we not maintain the existing behavior?

Reviewer 2: Could you clarify what you mean by `if we don't know` ?

Reviewer 4: I misread this comment, sorry

4. If there is no apiserver ID retrieved for the requested GVR, we will serve 404 with error `GVR <group_version_resource> is not served by anything in this cluster`

5. If the proxy call fails for network issues or any reason, we serve 503 with error `Error while proxying request to destination apiserver`

[handler chain]:https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/fc8f5a64106c30c50ee2bbcd1d35e6cd05f63b00/staging/src/k8s.io/apiserver/pkg/server/config.go#L639

#### StorageVersion enhancement needed

> StorageVersion API currently tells us whether a particular StorageVersion can be read from etcd by the listed apiserver. We will enhance this API to also include apiserver ID of the server that can serve this StorageVersion.

Reviewer 4: not familiar with this API, Is not already there?
```
// ServerStorageVersion An API server instance reports the version it can decode and the version it
// encodes objects to when persisting objects in the backend.
type ServerStorageVersion struct {
	// The ID of the reporting API server.
	APIServerID string
```

https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/29017306263f24897cc2cbbbb977c3a839d53ee1/pkg/apis/apiserverinternal/types.go#L62-L64 ,

> StorageVersion API currently tells us whether a particular StorageVersion can be read from etcd by the listed apiserver. We will enhance this API to also include apiserver ID of the server that can serve this StorageVersion.

Reviewer 2: Added a snippet of the change in the API object

> StorageVersion API currently tells us whether a particular StorageVersion can be read from etcd by the listed apiserver. We will enhance this API to also include apiserver ID of the server that can serve this StorageVersion.

Reviewer 2: > not familiar with this API, Is not already there?

So currently the StorageVersion  API tells you the apiserver that can read a particular GVR from etcd. It doesnt tell you if the apiserver can also serve it. The suggestion is to add this enhancement.

#### Identifying destination apiserver's network location

> We will use the already existing [masterlease reconciler](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/controlplane/reconcilers/lease.go) to store/retrieve the IPs and ports for kube-apiservers. Major reasons to use this are

Reviewer 4: I still have doubts about reusing the existing reconciler, this is the default reconciler but is optional, it depends on the `EndpointReconcilerType` chosen. I was thinking on having a totally new controller despite most of the code will be duplicated, but there will be zero risk of affecting this core logic.

The other option I can see is to use the existing v1.Lease controller instead of the etcd Leases

```
	m.GenericAPIServer.AddPostStartHookOrDie("start-kube-apiserver-identity-lease-controller", func(hookContext genericapiserver.PostStartHookContext) error {
			kubeClient, err := kubernetes.NewForConfig(hookContext.LoopbackClientConfig)
			if err != nil {
				return err
			}

			// generate a context  from stopCh. This is to avoid modifying files which are relying on apiserver
			// TODO: See if we can pass ctx to the current method
			ctx := wait.ContextForChannel(hookContext.StopCh)

			leaseName := m.GenericAPIServer.APIServerID
			holderIdentity := m.GenericAPIServer.APIServerID + "_" + string(uuid.NewUUID())

			controller := lease.NewController(
				clock.RealClock{},
				kubeClient,
				holderIdentity,
				int32(IdentityLeaseDurationSeconds),
				nil,
				IdentityLeaseRenewIntervalPeriod,
				leaseName,
				metav1.NamespaceSystem,
				// TODO: receive identity label value as a parameter when post start hook is moved to generic apiserver.
				labelAPIServerHeartbeatFunc(KubeAPIServer))
			go controller.Run(ctx)
```
/cc @wojtek-t

Reviewer 2: @deads2k how do you feel about using the APIServerIdentity v1.Lease to store/retrieve the apiserver IP info?

Reviewer 5: > @deads2k how do you feel about using the APIServerIdentity v1.Lease to store/retrieve the apiserver IP info?

I think this would work well and I think the security profile on it is ok since cluster-admins will  be able to specify an egress dialer.  You should confirm with @jpbetz

Reviewer 5: >Does this egress dialer support make this safe to run in a cloud provider? i.e. we cannot have cluster admins using this to make network request against backend networks accessible to the Kube API server.

I haven't ever wired it personally, but my understanding is that it can be used to restrict network access. @jkh52 would be on my list to ask.

1. masterlease reconciler already stores kube-apiserver IPs currently
2. this information is not exposed to users in an API that can be used maliciously
3. existing code to handle lifecycle of the masterleases is convenient

How the masterlease reconciler will be used is as follows:

> 1. We will use the already existing IP in Endpoints.Subsets.Addresses of the masterlease by default

Reviewer 3: Are we still planning to do this? Or are we requiring both `--bind-peer-ip` and `--peer-ca` be set for this feature to be used?

Reviewer 2: --bind-peer-ip will be an optional flag. 
--peer-ca is required for the feature.

Reviewer 2: Also called out the `optional` and `mandatory` bit explicitly.

2. For users with network configurations that would not allow Endpoints.Subsets.Addresses to be reachable from a kube-apiserver, we will introduce a new --bind-peer-ip flag to kube-apiserver. We will store its value as an annotation on the masterlease and use this to route the request to the right destination server

3. We will also expose the IP and port information of the kube-apiservers as annotations in APIserver identity lease object for visibility/debugging purposes

> 4. We will also use an egress dialer for network connections made to peer kube-apiservers. For this, will create a new type for the network context to be used for peer kube-apiserver connections ([xref](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/release-1.27/staging/src/k8s.io/apiserver/pkg/apis/apiserver/types.go#L56-L71))

Reviewer 2: I would prefer that too.

> 4. We will also use an egress dialer for network connections made to peer kube-apiservers. For this, will create a new type for the network context to be used for peer kube-apiserver connections ([xref](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/release-1.27/staging/src/k8s.io/apiserver/pkg/apis/apiserver/types.go#L56-L71))

Reviewer 5: > I think that postponing the egress dialer to beta should be reasonable IMHO

I'm ok with this, but it is a hard must for beta to have a good security profile.

#### Proxy transport between apiservers and authn

For the mTLS between source and destination apiservers, we will do the following

> 1. For server authentication by the client (source apiserver) : the client needs to validate the server certs (presented by the destination apiserver), for which it will 

Reviewer 2: Added more info on which certs are used for client as well as server authn.

>  If we need to invalidate/rotate certs, can we do it for only a single direction of traffic?

I am not quite sure about this. Need someone from sig-auth for comments here. Maybe @enj  ?

> 1. For server authentication by the client (source apiserver) : the client needs to validate the server certs (presented by the destination apiserver), for which it will 

Reviewer 6: The data from `--proxy-client-cert|key-file` would be used here.  I am not sure I follow the reasoning for how this enhancement covers all of those traffic directions.

> 1. For server authentication by the client (source apiserver) : the client needs to validate the server certs (presented by the destination apiserver), for which it will 

Reviewer 3: > The data from `--proxy-client-cert|key-file` would be used here. I am not sure I follow the reasoning for how this enhancement covers all of those traffic directions.

All the traffic directions except for `kube-apiserver to kube-apiserver` are pre-existing.  This PR adds this new direction and is reusing certs and keys from the `kube-apiserver to aggregated api server` for TLS for the new `kube-apiserver to kube-apiserver` direction.  Is this OK? Or should different flags be used to set up the client key and cert for this traffic direction?  (I don't feel I know the considerations here well enough to say)

> 1. For server authentication by the client (source apiserver) : the client needs to validate the server certs (presented by the destination apiserver), for which it will 

Reviewer 6: > This PR adds this new direction and is reusing certs and keys from the `kube-apiserver to aggregated api server` for TLS for this new `kube-apiserver to kube-apiserver` direction. Is this OK? Or should different flags be used to set up the client key and cert for this traffic direction?

The set of components and the network path is new, but the authentication flow is not.  Request header authentication is already used for both authentication to the Kube API server from front proxies as well from the Kube API server to aggregated API servers.  This is basically a mix of the two existing authentication paths.

   1. look at the CA bundle of the authority that signed those certs. We will introduce a new flag --peer-ca-file that must be passed to the kube-apiserver to verify the other kube-apiserver's server certs 
   2. look at the ServerName `kubernetes.default.svc` for SNI to verify server certs against

> 2. For client authentication by the server (destination apiserver) : destination apiserver will check the source apiserver certs to determine that the proxy request is from an authenticated client. The destination apiserver will use requestheader authentication (and NOT client cert authentication) for this using the kube-aggregator proxy client cert/key and the --requestheader-client-ca-file passed to the apiserver upon bootstrap

Reviewer 3: Clarify why requestheader authentication is used here? I'm guessing it is so that we authn the client that originated the proxied request. Is that correct?

Reviewer 2: requestheader auth is used to authenticate the source apiserver which is proxying the request to its peer.

together with explanation why this is acceptable.
-->

<!--
Additionally, for Alpha try to enumerate the core package you will be touching
to implement this enhancement and provide the current unit coverage for those
in the form of:
- <package>: <date> - <current test coverage>
The data can be easily read from:
https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-testing-canaries#ci-kubernetes-coverage-unit

This can inform certain test coverage improvements that we want to do before
extending the production code to implement this enhancement.
-->

- `<package>`: `<date>` - `<test coverage>`

##### Integration tests

<!--
This question should be filled when targeting a release.
For Alpha, describe what tests will be added to ensure proper quality of the enhancement.

For Beta and GA, add links to added tests together with links to k8s-triage for those tests:
https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html
-->

In the first alpha phase, the integration tests are expected to be added for:

- The behavior with feature gate turned on/off
- Validation where an apiserver tries to serve a request that has already been proxied once

> - Validation where an apiserver tries to call a peer but actually calls itself (to simulate a networking configuration where this happens on accident), and the test fails

Reviewer 2: Added.

3. **Increase in request traffic directed at destination kube-apiserver**

    There could be a large volume of requests for a specific resource which might result in the identified apiserver being unable to serve the proxied requests. This scenario should not occur too frequently, since resource types which have large request volume should not be added or removed during an upgrade - that would cause other problems, too.

4. **Indefinite rerouting of the request**
    
    We should ensure at most one proxy, rather than proxying the request over and over again (if the source apiserver has an incorrect understanding of what the destination apiserver can serve). To do this, we will add a new header such as `X-Kubernetes-UVIP-Rerouted:true` to the  request once it is determined that the request cannot be served by the local apiserver and should therefore be proxied.  
    We will remove this header after the request is received by the destination apiserver (i.e. after the proxy has happened once) at which point it will be served locally.

5. **Putting IP/endpoint and trust bundle control in user hands in REST APIs**
    

>     To prevent server-side request forgeries we will not give control over information about apiserver IP/endpoint and the trust bundle (used to authenticate server while proxying) to users via REST APIs.

Reviewer 6: So is there an API server flag that builds the mapping between identity and IP?  It is still unclear to me how this will work.

Reviewer 2: As highlighted in the [Alternatives section](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4015/files/5a0ca134921229e746217e899eb5157e9dbe0a67#diff-5f6582f50a19d8d39a3a9045f6f9b6e404edd88ef829c187709437484bf308f8R948), 

we can either : 

1. store the IP info directly in the APIServerIdentity lease object (which already has the APIServerID). This approach actually doesnt mitigate the risk of putting control over this info in user hands, unless we set up a webhook to not let users meddle with the APIServerIdentity leases.
2. Or retrieve the IP from  endpoint reconciler's masterlease object (that would need to be modified to store the APIServerID as a label perhaps). This approach is the safer option to use since we would be relying on storage leases that are not exposed to the end user.

Reviewer 6: I still do not understand what you are actually planning on doing (vs. alternatives).

Reviewer 2: I am leaning towards using the APIServerIdentity lease object, but waiting to hear from other folks if this approach is reasonable enough for alpha.

Reviewer 2: Updated the decision under [Identifying destination apiserver's network location](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/01637e17da9a0d1359a9304ad005c88234cd61ca/keps/sig-api-machinery/4020-unknown-version-interoperability-proxy/README.md#identifying-destination-apiservers-network-location) section. We will be writing to both

1. A new endpoint reconciler's masterleases (that will be read by apiservers to find peer ip, port info)
2. v1.Lease for users to read for visibilty/debugging

## Design Details

### Aggregation Layer

> ![Alt text](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/26771552/243512491-47c79882-1f32-4067-8e10-f8e16faa4997.png?raw=true "Optional Title")

Reviewer 6: We should perform authz before proxying right?

Reviewer 2: We are relying on the remote apiserver's authz flow to do that i.e. once the request is proxied to the peer. Will that not be sufficient?

Reviewer 6: No, we pre-authorize requests before proxying them to aggregated APIs and we should do the same here.  I see no benefit of not pre-authorizing the request, especially since all you have to do is move the UIVP handler to the end of the chain.

Reviewer 2: Got it, sure we can move the handler to the end of the chain, I dont have any arguments against that. Will try it out in my prototype and update the diagram after confirming that it works well.

Reviewer 2: Updated diagram to move the UVIP handler after the Authz handler

   1. This internal map is populated using an informer for StorageVersion objects. An event handler will be added for this informer that will get the apiserver ID of the requested group-version-resource and update the internal map accordingly

2. This filter will pass on the request to the next handler in the local aggregator chain, if:
   1. It is a non resource request
   2. The StorageVersion informer cache hasn't synced yet or if `StorageVersionManager.Completed()` has returned false. We will serve error 503 in this case
   3. The request has a header `X-Kubernetes-UVIP-Rerouted:true` that indicates that this request has been proxied once already. If for some reason the resource is not found locally, we will serve error 503
   4. No StorageVersion was retrieved for it, meaning the request is for an aggregated API or for a custom resource
   5. If the local apiserver ID is found in the list of serviceable-by server IDs from the internal map

3. If the local apiserver ID is not found in the list of serviceable-by server IDs, a random apiserver ID will be selected from the retrieved list and the request will be proxied to this apiserver

> 4. If there is no apiserver ID retrieved for the requested GVR, we will serve 404 with error `GVR <group_version_resource> is not served by anything in this cluster`

Reviewer 6: This sounds racey.  What if storage version objects have not been created yet?

Reviewer 6: > Ah I have missed to include a section about having poststarthook that will ensure that the storage version informer has synced before we mark the apiserver as ready

_And_ that we do not serve _any_ requests until we are done creating/updating SV objects.

Reviewer 2: Added.

  // The API server can decode objects encoded in these versions.
  // The encodingVersion must be included in the decodableVersions.
  DecodableVersions []string

  // Versions that can be served by the reporting API server
  ServedVersions []string
}
```

#### Identifying destination apiserver's network location

We have listed the approaches to store/retrieve apiservers' ip and port information in the [Alternatives](#alternatives) section.

We will use an egress dialer for network connections made to peer kube-apiservers. For this, will create a new type for the network context to be used for peer kube-apiserver connections ([xref](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/release-1.27/staging/src/k8s.io/apiserver/pkg/apis/apiserver/types.go#L56-L71))

#### Proxy transport between apiservers and authn

For the mTLS between source and destination apiservers, we will do the following

1. For server authentication by the client (source apiserver) : the client needs to validate the [server certs](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/release-1.27/staging/src/k8s.io/apiserver/pkg/server/options/serving.go#L59) (presented by the destination apiserver), for which it will 

>    1. look at the CA bundle of the authority that signed those certs. We will introduce a new flag --peer-ca-file that **is required be passed (for this feature)** to the kube-apiserver that will be used to verify the presented server certs

Reviewer 6: Why is the existing `--requestheader-client-ca-file` flag not sufficient here?

Reviewer 6: Err actually I know why, since it is okay to have a different root for the serving certs than the client certs.  Ignore me.

>    1. look at the CA bundle of the authority that signed those certs. We will introduce a new flag --peer-ca-file that **is required be passed (for this feature)** to the kube-apiserver that will be used to verify the presented server certs

Reviewer 6: This is a better flag name:

```suggestion
   1. look at the CA bundle of the authority that signed those certs. We will introduce a new flag --requestheader-serving-ca-file that **is required be passed (for this feature)** to the kube-apiserver that will be used to verify the presented server certs
```

Reviewer 2: I think we were planning to use a common "peer" prefix for the kube-apiserver <-> kube-apiserver comm. flags. As suggested by @jpbetz But can change it to "requestheader-serving-ca-file" if that makes more sense here.

Reviewer 3: @Richabanker To help everyone on this comment understand to understand the full context. What is the full set of flags that will be involved in configuring `kube-apiserver <-> kube-apiserver` traffic?

Reviewer 2: for authn:

--proxy-client-cert|key-file (presented by source apiserver to authn itself to destination apiserver)
--requestheader-client-ca-file (used by destination apiserver to authn source apiserver)

--tls-cert|(private-key)-file (presented by destination apiserver to authn itself to source apiserver)
--peer-ca-file (used by source apiserver to authn destination apiserver)

for locating the apiserver: 

--peer-bind-address

Reviewer 5: > for authn:
>
>--proxy-client-cert|key-file (presented by source apiserver to authn itself to destination apiserver)
--requestheader-client-ca-file (used by destination apiserver to authn source apiserver)
>
>secure serving flag : --tls-cert|(private-key)-file (presented by destination apiserver to authn itself to source apiserver)
--peer-ca-file (used by source apiserver to authn destination apiserver)
>
>for locating the apiserver:
>
>--peer-bind-address

Probably worth an example in the doc.  You'll also need `--requestheader-allowed-names` I think.

Reviewer 6: `--requestheader-serving-ca-file` still sounds better to me but I suspect any name we choose here will be difficult to explain in all contexts.

Reviewer 3: I chatted with @enj about this. It sounds like it should work fine have the flags as described in this KEP.

I don't have a strong opinion on the name of the CA file flag.  It would be good to use consistent terms as much as possible across user visible surfaces (flags, HTTP header, API fields/label keys).  I'm okay with continuing naming discussions post-enhancement freeze (names selected in KEPs are not usually considered final).

- Validation where an apiserver tries to call a peer but actually calls itself (to simulate a networking configuration where this happens on accident), and the test fails with error 503
- Validation where a request that cannot be served by any apiservers is received, and is passed on locally that eventually gets handled by the NotFound handler resulting in 404 error
- Validation where apiserver is mis configured and is proxied to an incorrect peer resulting in 503 error 

##### e2e tests

<!--
This question should be filled when targeting a release.
For Alpha, describe what tests will be added to ensure proper quality of the enhancement.

For Beta and GA, add links to added tests together with links to k8s-triage for those tests:
https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html

We expect no non-infra related flakes in the last month as a GA graduation criteria.
-->

We will test the feature mostly in integration test and unit test. We may add e2e test for spot check of the feature presence.

### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha

- Proxying implemented (behind feature flag)
- mTLS or other secure system used for proxying
- Ensure proper tests are in place.

#### Beta

> - Discovery document merging implemented

Reviewer 5: Agreed.  I'd be disappointed to see this relaxed.
